There's an algorithm called momentum,
or gradient descent with momentum
that almost always works faster than
the standard gradient descent algorithm.
In one sentence, the basic idea is to
compute an exponentially weighted average
of your gradients, and then use that
gradient to update your weights instead.
In this video, let's unpack that
one sentence description and
see how you can actually implement this.
As a example let's say that you're
trying to optimize a cost function
which has contours like this.
So the red dot denotes
the position of the minimum.
Maybe you start gradient descent here and
if you take one iteration of gradient
descent either or
descent maybe end up -heading there.
But now you're on the other
side of this ellipse, and
if you take another step of gradient
descent maybe you end up doing that.
And then another step,
another step, and so on.
And you see that gradient descents will
sort of take a lot of steps, right?
Just slowly oscillate toward the minimum.
And this up and down oscillations
slows down gradient descent and
prevents you from using
a much larger learning rate.
In particular, if you were to use a much
larger learning rate you might end up over
shooting and end up diverging like so.
And so the need to prevent the
oscillations from getting too big forces
you to use a learning rate
that's not itself too large.
Another way of viewing this problem
is that on the vertical axis
you want your learning to be a bit slower,
because you don't want those oscillations.
But on the horizontal axis,
you want faster learning.
Right, because you want it to
aggressively move from left to right,
toward that minimum, toward that red dot.
So here's what you can do if you
implement gradient descent with momentum.
On each iteration, or more specifically,
during iteration t you would compute
the usual derivatives dw, db.
I'll omit the superscript
square bracket l's but
you compute dw,
db on the current mini-batch.
And if you're using
batch gradient descent,
then the current mini-batch
would be just your whole batch.
And this works as well off
a batch gradient descent.
So if your current mini-batch
is your entire training set,
this works fine as well.
And then what you do is you
compute vdW to be Beta vdw
plus 1 minus Beta dW.
So this is similar to when
we're previously computing
the theta equals beta v theta
plus 1 minus beta theta t.
Right, so it's computing a moving average
of the derivatives for w you're getting.
And then you similarly compute vdb
equals that plus 1 minus Beta times db.
And then you would update
your weights using W gets
updated as W minus the learning rate
times, instead of updating it with dW,
with the derivative,
you update it with vdW.
And similarly,
b gets updated as b minus alpha times vdb.
So what this does is smooth out
the steps of gradient descent.
For example, let's say that in the last
few derivatives you computed were this,
this, this, this, this.
If you average out these gradients, you
find that the oscillations in the vertical
direction will tend to average
out to something closer to zero.
So, in the vertical direction, where
you want to slow things down, this will
average out positive and negative numbers,
so the average will be close to zero.
Whereas, on the horizontal direction,
all the derivatives are pointing to
the right of the horizontal direction, so
the average in the horizontal
direction will still be pretty big.
So that's why with this algorithm,
with a few iterations
you find that the gradient descent with
momentum ends up eventually just taking
steps that are much smaller
oscillations in the vertical direction,
but are more directed to just moving
quickly in the horizontal direction.
And so this allows your algorithm to
take a more straightforward path,
or to damp out the oscillations
in this path to the minimum.
One intuition for this momentum
which works for some people, but
not everyone is that if you're trying to
minimize your bowl shape function, right?
This is really the contours of a bowl.
I guess I'm not very good at drawing.
They kind of minimize this type
of bowl shaped function then
these derivative terms you
can think of as providing
acceleration to a ball that
you're rolling down hill.
And these momentum terms you can think
of as representing the velocity.
And so imagine that you have a bowl,
and you take a ball and
the derivative imparts acceleration
to this little ball as
the little ball is rolling down this hill,
right?
And so it rolls faster and
faster, because of acceleration.
And data, because this number a little
bit less than one, displays a row of
friction and it prevents your ball
from speeding up without limit.
But so rather than gradient descent,
just taking every single step
independently of all previous steps.
Now, your little ball
can roll downhill and
gain momentum, but it can accelerate down
this bowl and therefore gain momentum.
I find that this ball rolling down
a bowl analogy, it seems to work for
some people who enjoy physics intuitions.
But it doesn't work for everyone, so
if this analogy of a ball rolling
down the bowl doesn't work for
you, don't worry about it.
Finally, let's look at some
details on how you implement this.
Here's the algorithm and
so you now have two
hyperparameters of the learning rate
alpha, as well as this parameter Beta,
which controls your
exponentially weighted average.
The most common value for Beta is 0.9.
We're averaging over the last
ten days temperature.
So it is averaging of the last
ten iteration's gradients.
And in practice,
Beta equals 0.9 works very well.
Feel free to try different values and
do some hyperparameter search, but
0.9 appears to be a pretty robust value.
Well, and
how about bias correction, right?
So do you want to take vdW and vdb and
divide it by 1 minus beta to the t.
In practice, people don't usually do
this because after just ten iterations,
your moving average will have warmed
up and is no longer a bias estimate.
So in practice, I don't really see
people bothering with bias correction
when implementing gradient descent or
momentum.
And of course this process
initialize the vdW equals 0.
Note that this is a matrix of zeroes
with the same dimension as dW,
which has the same dimension as W.
And Vdb is also initialized
to a vector of zeroes.
So, the same dimension as db,
which in turn has same dimension as b.
Finally, I just want to mention that
if you read the literature on gradient
descent with momentum often you
see it with this term omitted,
with this 1 minus Beta term omitted.
So you end up with vdW
equals Beta vdw plus dW.
And the net effect of using this version
in purple is that vdW ends up being
scaled by a factor of 1 minus Beta,
or really 1 over 1 minus Beta.
And so when you're performing these
gradient descent updates, alpha just needs
to change by a corresponding
value of 1 over 1 minus Beta.
In practice,
both of these will work just fine,
it just affects what's the best
value of the learning rate alpha.
But I find that this particular
formulation is a little less intuitive.
Because one impact of this is that if you
end up tuning the hyperparameter Beta,
then this affects the scaling of vdW and
vdb as well.
And so you end up needing to retune
the learning rate, alpha, as well, maybe.
So I personally prefer the formulation
that I have written here on the left,
rather than leaving out
the 1 minus Beta term.
But, so
I tend to use the formula on the left,
the printed formula with
the 1 minus Beta term.
But both versions having Beta equal 0.9
is a common choice of hyper parameter.
It's just at alpha the learning rate
would need to be tuned differently for
these two different versions.
So that's it for
gradient descent with momentum.
This will almost always work
better than the straightforward
gradient descent algorithm
without momentum.
But there's still other things we could
do to speed up your learning algorithm.
Let's continue talking about
these in the next couple videos.